docs: website article (#1470)
PrQL/prql: website/content/functional-database.md

---

> title: Functional databases

Reviewer: I'm wondering whether you want to reference things like [Functional Database Model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Functional_database_model) or [The Functional Database - Rich Hickey](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tRoVyblAGrs) and [Datomic](https://www.datomic.com/)?

Otherwise **A Functional Query Language** could be an alternative title?

Btw, I recall the Rich Hickey talk being very good but I've completely forgotten all the content now.

Author: Yes, Rich's talk is somewhat related, thanks for linking.

I'm open to changing the title, I'd want it be not only descriptive but also a bit provocative. "A Functional Query Language" may put off people that are fed up with new languages :D

Reviewer: The title is completely up to you of course. I just felt that we're not really changing the functional nature of the database (as opposed to what Rich Hickey is talking about IIRC) but rather how you query or retrieve data.

* A functional paradigm for querying databases
* A functional approach to data queries
* ?

Author: That's true - it's not the database, but just the query language...

intended, function call with no argument and a plain reference to the function
are expressed with the same syntax.

Let's extend this behavior and allow allow bare function calls in a few places
where they cannot become ambiguous:

```
# a list:
[my_function arg1 arg2 arg3, my_function arg4 arg5 arg6]
# a declaration:
let res = my_function arg1 arg2 arg3
```

Secondly, I'd argue that currying looks natural.

```
let curry = my_function arg1 arg2
let res = curry arg3

# or inline:
let res = (my_function arg1 arg2) arg3
```

Now let's go one step further and introduce a "pipe" operator. It applies left
operand as an argument to the right operand:

```
arg3 | my_function arg1 arg2
```

This is especially useful for chaining function calls. If we declare `div`,
`floor` and `mul` as common arithmetic functions, the function call syntax
really starts to make sense:

```
12 | div 5 | floor | mul 5
```

## Running real relations

Up to this point, we were talking language design without a clear justification.
Language being cool is fine, but it is much more important that the language is
actually the right tool for the job.

The job, in the case of PRQL, is querying databases.

> Core unit of data here is a relation: an ordered set of rows, each of which

Reviewer: > Core unit of data here is a relation: an ordered set of rows,

Is a relation an *ordered set of rows* or a *set of ordered tuples*?

I don't really know the answer but to me the statement seemed to imply that there was an inherent order in the data whereas my impression has always been that there are no order guarantees in SQL until you introduce an `ORDER BY` clause (cf #1363).

Author: Well there is an inherent order, it's just that for tables it's unknown and that all SQL SELECT statements without ORDER BY may change it.

So yes, in practice this is almost the same as relations being unordered, but with that definition, ORDER BY does not make much sense. As expressed in #1363, I'd prefer that PRQL does this better.

Also, I just realized that rows and tuples seem to be another ambiguous pair that is almost the same, but we never really define it, so we all use it a little differently...

contains entries for each of the columns.

Queries operate in a static environment that contains references to database
tables and a library of standard functions.

```
mod default_db {
    let albums = ...
    let artists = ...
    let tracks = ...
}

mod std {
    func from tbl -> ...

>     func select tbl -> ...

Reviewer: Does this not need a `cols` argument between `select` and `table`?

It's not really relevant to article but it's one of these nits that bothered me while reading it.

Author: Oh, you're right, thanks

---
title: A functional approach to relational queries
date: 2023-01-07
authors: ["aljazerzen"]
layout: article
toc: true
---

I believe that many of the ideas from functional programming are very suitable
for a query language. To make a case for it, I'll briefly explain a few
features, adapt their syntax and show how they are used in PRQL.

## Fancy functional features

> Functional programming is an old school programming paradigm, that is slowly

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Functional programming is an old school programming paradigm that is gradually
```

gaining traction within a few common languages that are designed with procedural
paradigm in mind.

The many aspects of paradigm have been discussed extensively, so I'll try to be

> brief. If you've already read then all, I suggest you skip to the next section,
> but if you haven't, I think you'll be glad that I decided to showcase the
> features using pseudo code that looks like JavaScript. I know it has problem,
> but it's something most of us can read.

Reviewer 2: for brevity

```suggestion
brief. If you've already read then all, I suggest you skip to the next section.
```

### Pure functions

This is the core aspect that allows us to do most of the magic later. When we
say "pure function", we just mean the mathematical function and not "a
procedure" or "a method". To be more precise:

> - Pure functions have no side effects. This means that no global state is
>   altered and nothing is logged or printed. The function result is the only this

Reviewer 2: clarity / extraneous

```suggestion
- Pure functions have no side effects. This means that no global state is
  altered. The function result is the only the
```

  output that the function produces.
- Pure functions produce the same output given the same args. The output does

>   not depend on any external information, so no random can be called, no user
>   input requested and no system calls made.

Reviewer 2: clarity

```suggestion
  not depend on any external information; for example the current time or a random number generator
```

The most obvious effect is that for a pure function `my_function`, this:

```js
res1 = my_function(arg);
res2 = my_function(arg);
res3 = my_function(arg);
```

... is equivalent to:

```js
res1 = my_function(arg);
res2 = res1;
res3 = res2;
```

Because `my_function` is guaranteed to return the same result when given `arg`,
we can skip calling `my_function` for the second and the third time, because we

> (or even better: the compiler) already know what the output will be.

Reviewer 2: brevity
```suggestion
already know what the output will be.
```

> This may seem like a minor point, but we just getting started.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This may seem like a minor point, but we're just getting started.
```

### First class citizens

> Nearly a buzz word, the saying "functions are first class citizens" means that

Reviewer 2: idioms (though we can replace it with something else if helpful)

```suggestion
Functions being first class citizens" means that
```

they are treated the same as any other value.

They can be stored in a variable, they can be passed to another function as an
argument or even be used in binary operations.

```js
function double(x) {
  return 2 * x;
}

let preprocess = double;

my_array = [4, 5, 6];

my_array.map(preprocess);
// yields [8, 10, 12]
```

Here, we've stored function `double` in variable `preprocess` and then passed
that to method `Array.map`, which applies a given function to each of the array
elements.

### Currying

> Named after Haskell Curry, currying is an implicit act of converting a function

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Named after Haskell Curry, currying is an implicitly converts a function
```
idioms

call with missing arguments into a new function.

```js
function add(x, y) {
  return x + y;
}
let add_one = add(1);
```

Because we didn't specify `y` parameter of `add` function, the result is a new
function that is still waiting for the last argument. It is equivalent to
defining add_one like this:

> function add_one(y) { return add(1, y) }

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
```js
function add_one(y) { return add(1, y) }
```
````

### Implicit function call

Let's suppose that we have a pure function that doesn't take any arguments:

```js
function my_function() {
  return 42;
}
```

Because it is a pure function, it cannot depend on anything other than its
non-existing arguments. Another way to phrase it, this is a constant expression.

And as such, it might as well be defined as one:

```js
let my_var = 42;
```

> In conventional programming languages[1], there is a difference between using

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In conventional programming languages[^1], there is a difference between using
```

`my_function()` and `my_var`. The first one evaluates the expression at the call
site, while the second one evaluates it at the declaration site. It is also
possible to express just `my_function`, a reference to a function that can be
called without arguments.

> But if all your functions are pure, we generalize by saying that all three cases

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But if all functions are pure, we generalize by saying that all three cases
```

singular voice

are equivalent.

To make this work, let's say that `my_function` is "implicitly invoked" just as
it would have been expressed as `my_function()`.

Also, if we declare all functions to be pure it doesn't matter exactly _when_
they are evaluated. So let's give the compiler the authority to make an informed
guess about _when_ and make `my_var` and `my_function()` semantically
equivalent.

> [1]: Let's say that conventional languages are first 15 from this list:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[^1]: Let's say that conventional languages are first 15 from this list:
```

(unless I'm wrong about markdown and this isn't needed??)

Author: I'm pretty sure I wrote it as `[^1]`... Strange

https://survey.stackoverflow.co/2022/#most-popular-technologies-language-prof

## Syntax, surly shinier

First of all, lets change the function call to this:

```
(my_function arg1 arg2 arg3)
```

> It may look strange because function name is within the parenthesis and there is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It may look strange because the function name is within the parenthesis and there are
```

> no commas between arguments. But trust me, there are benefits to this syntax.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
no commas between arguments. But there are some benefits to this syntax...
```

Firstly, when the call has no arguments, the parenthesis can be omitted:

```
(my_function) == my_function
```

which feels very natural because of the similar behavior with expressions. As

> intended, function call with no argument and a plain reference to the function

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
intended, a function call with no argument and a plain reference to the function
```

are expressed with the same syntax.

> Let's extend this behavior and allow allow bare function calls in a few places

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's extend this behavior and allow bare function calls in a few places
```

> where they cannot become ambiguous:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
where they're unambiguous:
```

```
# a list:
[my_function arg1 arg2 arg3, my_function arg4 arg5 arg6]

> # a declaration:

Reviewer 2: I actually like this rather than `assign` maybe we should rename internally...

Author: I'm not sure if I understand correctly, but this is a declaration of a variable that also contains an assign?

let res = my_function arg1 arg2 arg3
```

Secondly, I'd argue that currying looks natural.

```
let curry = my_function arg1 arg2
let res = curry arg3

# or inline:
let res = (my_function arg1 arg2) arg3
```

> Now let's go one step further and introduce a "pipe" operator. It applies left

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now let's go one step further and introduce a "pipe" operator. It applies its left
```

operand as an argument to the right operand:

```
arg3 | my_function arg1 arg2
```

This is especially useful for chaining function calls. If we declare `div`,
`floor` and `mul` as common arithmetic functions, the function call syntax

> really starts to make sense:

Reviewer 2: I don't think `div` and `mul` are great examples — `/` & `*` are simple too! It would be better to compare nested function calls. Indeed PRQL pipelines expressed as nested function calls would really look terrible, whereas as pipelines they're beautiful

Author: I wanted to start with simple functions that don't operate on some complex relation types, but plain numbers.

```
12 | div 5 | floor | mul 5
```

## Running real relations

> Up to this point, we were talking language design without a clear justification.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Up to this point, we've discussed language design in the abstract
```

> Language being cool is fine, but it is much more important that the language is
> actually the right tool for the job.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Writing in an elegant language is all good, but we need to show it's the right tool for the job.
```

The job, in the case of PRQL, is querying databases.

> Core unit of data here is a relation: an ordered set of rows, each of which

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The core unit of data here is a "relation": an ordered set of rows, each of which
```

> contains entries for each of the columns.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
contains entries for each of the columns. (More people are likely to be familiar with a "table", which is relation stored in a DB.)
```

Queries operate in a static environment that contains references to database
tables and a library of standard functions.

```

> mod default_db {

Reviewer 2: I find this a bit confusing, but maybe it's just me.

I think the article is strong because it has the potential to persuade data people that:
a) functional languages are good
b) functional languages can be applied to relational data transformations
c) functional languages can work well with SQL, by operating at the relational level — there's no need to write a whole Scala framework with its own data processing engine...

That's already a lot! So anything else, like `default_db` we could try and minimize? I don't think folks will be confused by where `albums` come from?

Reviewer: I'm inclined to agree on the default_db point. It was very interesting for me personally to see how the `from tbl` translates into `default_db.tbl` but it does seem a bit orthogonal to the rest of the argument (from what I recall right now, would have to reread to be sure).

Author: Maybe you are right - it's not the main point of the article and but code block attracts too much attention.

    let albums = ...
    let artists = ...
    let tracks = ...
}

mod std {
    func from tbl -> ...

>     func select cols tbl -> ...

Reviewer 2: I reckon we should either link to the function docs, or explain that this is a function named `select` which takes columns and a table...

    func take range tbl -> ...

    func sum col -> ...
    func average col -> ...
}
```

The exact structure and naming may change, but the important part is that we
have global immutable variables that can be referenced from pure functions.

PRQL currently supports most of the features described above, focused around the

> unconventional function call syntax.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
innovative function call syntax.
```

WDYT? I don't think it's _that_ unconventional, it's more like we're applying something good to this area...

Author: I was searching for a word and couldn't find anything...

A basic operation on a relation would be:

```
(take 3 default_db.albums)
# of with a pipeline

> (default_db.albums | take 3 )

Reviewer 2: As above, I think the `default_db` makes it less clear.

One option would be focus just on `take` above (rather than lots of fucns), explain what it does, and then apply it here?

```
(from albums | take 3)
```

To make querying easier, PRQL also has some neat name resolution rules that
allow function arguments to refer to each other. In practice, it allows
referring to columns of a relation in function calls:

```
(select [title, artist_id] default_db.albums)
# with a pipeline:
(from albums | select [title, artist_id])
```

All these queries can be simplified to an expression of relations and scalars.
In PRQL, we call such an expression a Relational Query. It is an intermediate
representation of prql-compiler and can be translated into SQL to be executed on
basically any relational database.

## Appendix

#### PRQL support

PRQL is a work is progress. It does not yet support all the features presented
here, namely:

- `let` syntax for variable declarations,
- inline currying - function call must start with a function name,
- syntax for declaring tables.

We focused on the core features and left these out because they can be worked
around.

Also, PRQL may not ever get all of these features, because ideas in this article
are only my own and not necessarily of the whole PRQL core team.

#### Many functions in SQL are not pure

And we don't have a plan on

> [how to deal with that](https://github.com/PRQL/prql/issues/1111).

Reviewer 2: I think this would work best as a footnote

> #### In math, function call syntax is ambiguous

Reviewer 2: I also this this could be cut for brevity / relegated to a footnote

    [how to deal with that](https://github.com/PRQL/prql/issues/1111).

### Basics

A basic operation on a relation would be:

```
(take 3 albums)
# or with a pipeline:
(albums | take 3)
```

... where `take` is a function and `albums` is a static relation. This does
exactly what it sounds like: it limits the result to the first n rows. One could
say it selects the top n rows.

In actual PRQL queries, we have some rules regarding references to tables, which
I'll talk about it some other time. For now, let's just say that for referencing
tables (i.e. static relations) use the function `from`. It has the bonus that it
makes queries look a lot more like SQL:

```
(from albums | take 3)
```

To make querying easier, we have some neat name resolution rules that allow
function arguments to refer to each other. In practice, it allows referring to
columns of a relation in function calls:

```
(select [title, artist_id] default_db.albums)
# and with a pipeline:
(from albums | select [title, artist_id])
```

All these queries can be simplified to an expression of relations and scalars.
In PRQL, we call such expressions "Relational Queries" or RQ for short. It is an

> intermediate representation of prql-compiler and can be translated to SQL and

Reviewer: *intermediate representation of **the** prql-compiler*

executed on basically any relational database.

This is the gist of how to express SQL queries with a functional language. At
this stage a curious reader might ask "can PRQL express any SQL query?" to which
I'd say: almost. Another might be wondering "but is it less cumbersome and more
consistent?" and I'd reply "very much, yes", but it depends on who you ask. And
someone might say "why functional?" to which I say "exactly the question I was
waiting for!".

There are a few quick benefits I want to get out of the way:

> - Pipelines make the flow of the query "top-to-bottom". An earlier part of a the

Reviewer: This is a great point!

`aggregate` is passed to `group` as a function to be applied to each of the
groups. `aggregate` then converts each of the groups into a single row and
returns that to `group` that composes these rows back together. This can now be
passed on to `filter`, which will remove any rows that don't match its
condition.

In SQL, a similar expression would have these four parts:

- projection in SELECT,
- an aggregation function that implicitly triggers aggregation,
- GROUP BY clause,
- HAVING clause.

These parts are entangled syntactically and semantically into one feature we
understand as GROUPING.

The beautiful realization is that these are 3 different operations that are
happening and that when separated they don't need to be associated with each
other. For example `filter` is more commonly expressed as WHERE and `group` has
other uses than `aggregate`.

But to separate these core relational operations, we need a way to express
aggregate as a function. This is why the functional paradigm fits the relational
data model.

### Distinct

A common question when learning SQL is "how do I select the row where column x

> is min?". It has many variations, but there are two ways of doing it:

Reviewer: I would say "where column x is **smallest**" or "where column x is **minimised**".

```prql
from tab
group y (sort x | take 1)
```

And it does. You can go and test this out in the
[PRQL playground](https://prql-lang.org/playground/).

Another variation of the question would be "how do I select a row, for each
group over all columns?". If you phrase it differently "group by all columns and
then take one row from each group". Or another way: "select distinct values of
all columns".

```prql
from tab
group tab.* (take 1)
```

As you can see, our language has many shortcuts for expressing operations such
as DISTINCT. This is convenient for us humans, but it's not a good base for a
relational query language.

I hope my point is clear: relational query language benefits a lot by separating
operations into orthogonal transforms[^3]. These transforms are in most cases
pure functions that are easiest to express in a functional language.

<!-- SQL, on the other hand, uses many keywords and syntactic constructs to
express the most commonly used combinations of these transforms. This falls short
when trying to express uncommon operations while not providing significantly
shorter queries. -->

If you want to see more of what PRQL is capable of, come and check out

> [the project](https://github.com/PRQL/prql). It may not have monads (yet), it's

Reviewer: "It may not have monads (yet), **but** it's"
